Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger, and today
we're going to start talking about the basics of
algebra. We're going to start off with very simple
algebra, the kind that students learn in public
school. This kind of algebra involves
unknown quantities which are denoted by
letters, usually the letters at the end of
the alphabet like x, y, and z. So for us now,
x is an unknown number, and we're given an
equation like this one: x plus two equals seven.
It's a game. If you have a ten-year-old
daughter like I do, you can ask her,
"With x plus two equals 7, what is x?" She'll
think for a little while and figure out that x
equals 5. If I give her a slightly harder one like
this, it might be a little bit more challenging:
x plus 13 equals 41. But eventually, she might
figure out that x equals 28. However, with a more
complicated question like this involving
bigger numbers: x plus 378 equals 642,
how is she going to figure out that the
answer is 264? Some kind of manipulation
of the equation is necessary to reduce it to
a simpler equation. It turns out that although
the original equation involves addition, the
actual solution of the problem uses subtraction.
So if we start off with x plus 378 equals 642, the
way we solve that is by rewriting that equation
in this form: we bring the 378 on this side to the
other side, where the plus sign turns into a minus
sign. So that's how we can then calculate that
x equals 264. These two equations are considered
to be equivalent in the sense that if we have a
solution to this one, then it's also a solution
to this one. Conversely, if we have a solution to
this one, then it's also a solution to this one.
This is a basic strategy in algebra, even in more
complicated algebra, to take an equation involving
some unknowns and simplify it to get an equivalent
equation which is easier or simpler to solve.
Here are some other examples: y minus 5 equals 3,
illustrating that the variable doesn't have to be
x. It could be y or z or anything else. In this
case, there's a minus 5 on the same side as the y,
and so we like to bring the minus 5 to the other
side where it becomes a plus five. So we get y
equals three plus five, which of course is eight.
How about this equation: z plus ten equals two?
Well, if we bring the ten to the other side with
the minus sign, we get z equals two minus ten.
Now the answer is minus eight, and we see that
even if we start with a problem involving only
natural numbers, the solution might very
well take us into the realm of the integers.
So in general, for this kind of equation, we
need to consider our numbers to include integers.
Now let's have a look at some slightly more
sophisticated problems. Suppose we have the
equation 3x equals twelve, and our convention
is—and we have to be clear about what the
convention is—that 3x means three times x. You can
see why we might use this convention because if
we're using x as a variable, then it can easily
get confused with our multiplication symbol.
So when we write 3x, it means 3 times x, or
similarly, 3y means 3 times y, and so on.
Alright, well if 3 times x equals 12, then if
you know your multiplication table, x equals 4
because 3 times 4 is 12. If 7x equals 49, then
from your multiplication table, x equals 7.
But if you have 19x equals 893, your
multiplication table probably doesn't
go up that far, so you don't just automatically
know what the answer is. Although the question
involves multiplication, the solution uses
division. In other words, we take this equation
19x equals 893 and replace it with the equivalent
equation obtained by dividing both sides by 19. If
we divide this by 19, we just get simply x, and if
we divide this by 19, well we get that fraction,
and 893 divided by 19 turns out to
be 47 once you do the long division.
Here are some other examples in the
same kind of spirit: 4y equals 36.
Well, then y equals 36 over 4, and that's
9. Here's another example: 5z equals 11.
Dividing by 5, we get z equals 11 over 5.
But now, as opposed to the previous cases,
11 divided by 5 is not a natural number
or an integer, so we must remain with
this quantity as simply a fraction. This kind
of question generally requires us to extend
our number system to include rational numbers.
Fractions or rational numbers—I recall that
fractions for me are always positive and rational
numbers can include negative fractions as well.
So we can use both of those types
of equations and put them together
to get somewhat more complicated examples. For
example, 3x plus 4 equals 11 minus 2x plus 8.
That's a single equation in an unknown variable
x. The assumption is that this variable x and this
variable x represent the same mystery number, and
we have to find out what that mystery number is.
What we generally do is replace this equation
with a series of equivalent equations obtained
from this one by standard operations. Generally
speaking, we try to get all the x's on one side
and all the numbers on the other side. Then we
try to simplify everything until we
finally have x equals some number.
So in this case, 3x plus 2x on this side becomes
a plus 2x when we bring it over there. We have 11
plus 8. The 4 here becomes a minus 4 when we
bring it to the other side. So 5x equals 15,
and x equals 3. Another example involving some
fractions involving our unknown variable x:
6x minus 1 divided by 2 equals 5 plus 3x divided
by 7, and x becomes the fraction 17 over 36.
Manipulation of these kinds of algebraic equations
relies heavily on a prior understanding of
arithmetic with fractions. If you don't
know how to do arithmetic with fractions
fluidly, then you're always going to struggle
with algebra. This is a very important point.
It's one reason why—get rid of those
calculators when you're teaching students
mathematics. Force them to work with pen
and paper to become confident and skilled
at arithmetic with fractions because
it's the basis for moving to algebra.
So here's a fun little party game that you're
all probably familiar with. Let's look at a
particular example. Suppose that we're asked to
pick a number and say add three. We're going to
think of our number as being x instead of 7
or 12 or whatever. Let's think of it being an
x; this turns out to clarify what's going on. So
after we've added three, we have x plus three.
Suppose the next instruction is to multiply it by
two. Well, two times x plus three is 2x plus six.
The next instruction is to add ten. Alright,
so then we have 2x plus 16. The next
instruction might be to subtract 4.
Well, then we have 2x plus 12. Then we are told to
divide by 2. Well, if we divide 2x plus 12 by 2,
what we're going to get is x, because 2x divided
by 2 is x, plus 6, because 12 divided by 2 is 6.
Okay, and then finally we're asked
to subtract our original number.
So there's the number we got right now;
the original number was x. If we take x
plus six and we subtract x, then we end
up with six. And you can see that yes,
the answer is six. It is independent
of the number x that you started with.
Next time, we're going to have a
look at solving quadratic equations,
which is a big step up from these linear equations
we've been looking at so far, but it's still part
of Baby Algebra. I hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.